\input texinfo        @c                    -*- Texinfo -*-@setfilename xconq-x11.info@settitle Playing and Designing with X11 Xconq@finalout@setchapternewpage off@iftex@raggedbottom@global@parindent=0pt@end iftex@titlepage@title X11 Xconq for@subtitle Playing and Designing with X11 Xconq@subtitle March 1995@author Stanley T. Shebs@page@vskip 0pt plus 1filllCopyright @copyright{} 1995 Stanley T. ShebsPermission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies ofthis manual provided the copyright notice and this permission noticeare preserved on all copies.Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of thismanual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also thatthe entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of apermission notice identical to this one.Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manualinto another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.@end titlepage@ifinfo@formatSTART-INFO-DIR-ENTRY* X11 Xconq: (xconq-x11.info).       Playing and Designing with X11 XconqEND-INFO-DIR-ENTRY@end formatCopyright (c) 1995 Stanley T. ShebsPermission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies ofthis manual provided the copyright notice and this permission noticeare preserved on all copies.Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of thismanual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also thatthe entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of apermission notice identical to this one.Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manualinto another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.@node Top@top Programming the Hitachi @sc{sh} with the Cygnus Developer's Kit@display@strong{Stanley T. Shebs}March, 1995@end displayThis document is X11-specific info about Xconq.@end ifinfo@include x11-chap.texi@page@w{ }@contents@c second page break makes sure right-left page alignment works right@c with a one-page toc, even though we don't have setchapternewpage odd.@page@w{ }@bye