@c                                                  -*-Texinfo-*-@c Contents of Mac Xconq guide or chapter.  For use as a chapter,@c surround inclusion of this file with `@lowersections' and `@raisesections'.@menu* Introduction::	Introduction to Mac Xconq* Playing::			Playing Mac Xconq* Designing::		Designing with Mac Xconq* Troubleshooting::	Troubleshooting Mac Xconq@end menu@node Introduction@chapter Introduction to Mac Xconq@section Installing@i{Xconq} requires no special installation once you have unpacked it.Since the distribution consists of a number of files and folders inaddition to the application proper, it will be less confusing to keep@i{Xconq} in a separate folder.@samp{Xconq} is the game application.It has been tested on nearly every kindof Mac (including PowerMacs), all running 7.0 or better.No init/extension compatibility problems have been reported so far.@samp{lib} is a folder of game modules.@samp{lib-mac} includes Mac-specific files referenced by game modules.@i{Xconq} doesn't absolutely have to have these files, but you maylose some pictures or sound effects without them.@samp{doc} is the folder of generic documentation for players and game designers.It does not have any Mac-specific information.  The format is Texinfo,which is based on TeX, which you'll need TeXtures or OzTeX and thetexinfo.tex file to format, sorry.@samp{IMFApp} is a small utility for game designers to display and convertimages used in @i{Xconq} games.See below for information on how to use @samp{IMFApp}.@section Playing an Introductory GameDouble-click on the @i{Xconq} icon.You get an initial screen with several buttons.Click on New.  You get a list of available games.The ``Introductory'' game should be highlighted;if not, then find it in the list and click on it.Then click OK.  You then get a list of sides and players; click OK again.After some activity, you see several windows open up.The most important window is the map.It's mostly black, indicating that you don't know anything aboutwhat's out there.  You should see a small picture of a city,and a small picture of a diagonal line of soldiers below it;the soldiers have a heavy black outline around them.This means that they are ready to move.Note that the cursor is a arrow, and that it always points away fromthe soldiers.  This means that if you click anywhere in the map,the soldiers (your ``infantry unit'') will try to move to the placeyou clicked.  This happens the same whether you click in an adjacent hex(or ``cell'') or one far away, or even somewhere out in unknown regions.Your infantry is smart enough to find its way around some obstacles,and will stop and wait for new orders if they are blocked.Click to move the infantry a few times.Notice that the turn number is changing at each move.Then all of a sudden @i{Xconq} will highlight a new infantry!Your city was working on it quietly while you were moving the first one;now @i{Xconq} will ping-pong between the two, asking first about one,then the other.Get used to it - it won't be long before you have dozens or even hundredsof units at your command!Fortunately for your sanity,@i{Xconq} provides some assistance - more on that later.At this point you should have several infantry wandering around.Use them to explore the world - send each out in a different directionso as to learn the most the fastest.  Eventually they will have spreadout so much that @i{Xconq} has to scroll over to each one beforeasking about it.  This can be a little disorienting.One thing you can do is to go to a lower magnification for the map;either click on the small mountains picture in the lower corner ofthe map window, or go to the ``View'' menu and pick something from ``Set Mag''.With a little experimentation, you will see that you can magnify somuch that a single hex nearly fills the window,or make the whole world appear to be the size of a postage stamp.[control options][finish describing startup of intro in great detail]@node Playing@chapter Playing Mac Xconq@section Starting a GameThe splash screen gives you four choices:New, which brings up a list of games;Open, which allows you to pick a file;Connect, which will (when it works) allow you to pick a game to join;and Quit, which lets you escape.Usually you will want to choose New,which brings up a dialog listing all the games.You can select one and see a brief description of it.You can also load a game from a file by clicking on the ``Open'' button.This just uses the standard Mac file-opening dialog.You can restore a saved game this way.Double-clicking on a saved game or other game file works too.@subsection Loading a GameWhether you've chosen from New Game or Open Game,@i{Xconq} will go through a loading process,which may take a while if the game is large or complicated.You may get some warning alerts, which are often benign(such as an inability to find some images),but others are indicative of disaster ahead.If you see one and continue anyway,don't be surprised if the game goes up in a cloud of smoke later!@subsection VariantsIf the game includes any ``variants'',you will then get a dialog with assorted buttons and checkboxes to choose from.  For instance, some games let you choose whether the whole world is visible when you start, or what kind of scoring system to use.Different games have different variants,but there are several used by many games.The ``World Seen'' checkbox, when set, makes the whole world seen rightfrom the beginning of the game.  This only affects the initial view,and you will only see some types of units belonging to other players,such as their cities.The ``See All'' checkbox makes everything seen all the time,right down to each occupant of each unit of each side.This makes @i{Xconq} more like a boardgame, where everything is ``on the table''(so to speak).The ``World Size'' button brings up a dialog that you can use to changethe dimensions of the world in everybody will be playing.In @i{Xconq}, the available area of the world is either a hexagon,or a cylinder wrapping entirely around the world.You get the cylinder by setting the circumference equalto the width of the area. See the generic player's manualfor more details about world size and shape.[``Real Time'' button]@subsection Player SetupThe player setup window shows the sides that will be in the gameand who will play each side.As with the variants, you will often just want to accept it(click ``OK''), since the game's designer usually sets the defaults reasonably.If you want to change the setup,you first need to understand the current set of sides and proposed players.Each entry in the list of sides starts off with the side's emblem(if it has one), followed by the name of side, then in italics,some information about the player, and then the initial advantagefor the player.  You, the person sitting in front of the screen,is described as ``You'', while players that are actually run by thecomputer are described as ``AI mplayer'', ``AI'' being short for``artificial intelligence''(In some games, a player may be a specialized AI, named <name>,in which case it will be described as ``AI <name>''.)In games that allow you to have more than the default number of sides,you can just click the ``Add'' button.All the other controls require you to have selected a side/player pair.You can do this by clicking anywhere in one of the boxes describingthe side/player pair, which will be highlighted in response.The ``Computer'' button toggles the AI for that side.You can add an AI to any side (including your own side; more on that later).You can also remove the AI from any side; a side with no AI and nohuman player will just sit quietly and do nothing throughout the entire game. If you don't like the side you're on, you can use the ``Exchange''button to switch.  The ordering of the sides is fixed,so exchange just exchanges players between the currently selectedside/player pair and the next one.@subsection Final SetupWhen all the setup dialogs have been OKed,@i{Xconq} will finish setting up the game.For some games, this will take quite a while - @i{Xconq} generates randomterrain, positions countries so that they are neither too close nortoo far apart, and does many other things to set up the game, sojust kick back and watch.Once everything is set up, @i{Xconq} then opens up the game window,the instructions window, and one map window for you.The map shows you terrain with different patterns,and your playing pieces (units) with small pictures.Note that some @i{Xconq} games allow the AI either to act first,or to start acting as soon as the windows come up.You may even find yourself being attacked before you know what's happening!@section Playing a GameThe basic pattern of play is to find a unit in a map or list window,click once to select it, and then pick commands from the ``Play'' menu.There is also an ``auto-select'' mode that does the selection for youand interprets mouse clicks as movement commands; @i{Xconq} actuallystarts up in this mode [, but this is a preference you can set].You can select units by clicking on a unit, shift-clicking a group,dragging out a selection rectangle, or by using Command-A to selectall units.  A selected unit is indicated by an outline box - solid blackto indicate that it can move, dark gray to indicate that it cannot move,and gray to indicate that it cannot do anything at all (at least duringthis turn; some types of units may only get to do something once in a while).If clicking on a unit image doesn't have any effect, then it's not a unitthat belongs to you.To move a selected unit, drag the selected unit to its desired new location.The unit might not move right away if it doesn't have the action points,but it may get some in the next turn.  To move all selected units,do Command-click on the desired location and all of them will attemptto move there.To shoot at another unit, you can position the mouse over the desired target,type 'f', and all selected units will attempt to fire.This works even if all units are selected,so you can call down considerable destruction with 'f'!If the target is too far away, nothing will happen.To find out more about a unit, pick ``Closeup'' from the ``Play'' menuor do Command-I.  This brings up a window that shows all kind ofdata about a single unit.  You can leave this window up and itwill always be kept up-to-date.To jump ahead to the next turn, do the menu command ``End Turn'' or <return>.You may have to do this if some of your units still have action points,but not enough to do any of the things you want them to do.The Game window (Command-1) shows the status of all the sides in the game.The window shows both the emblem (if available) and name of each side.A small computer icon indicates that an AI is running the side,while a face icon indicates your side's relationship with the side(frowning = enemy, etc).Each side also has a progress bar that shows how many actions itsunits have left to do.  [describe auto-selection]@section MenusThis section describes all the menus.@subsection File MenuThe File menu includes the usual sorts of commands that all Mac programs share.[New Game]Brings up the new game dialog.[Open Game]Brings up a standard file dialog.@i{Xconq} will assume the selected file to be a game definition andattempt to load it as such.[Connect]Use the Connect item to join in a game that is already running elsewhere.(Not implemented yet.)[Save]Saves the game to a file.[Save As]Saves the game to a file, with a name chosen from a dialog that pops up.[Preferences]Brings up a dialog that you can use to select various options.[need to describe preferences][Page Setup][Print Window]Prints the front window.[Quit]Leaves @i{Xconq}.@subsection Edit MenuNote that there is no Undo.  Hey, this game is a life-or-death struggle,and you may have noticed that you don't get an Undo in real life either...[Cut][Copy][Paste][Clear]These are not currently supported either(who's that knocking at the door?  Oh no, it's the Human Interface Police!Please don't take me away, I was going to get around to figuring what Copywas supposed to mean for a strategy game, honest!  Nooooooooo...) [Select All]Selects all units that you are currently allowed to select.Most commands will operate on multiple unit selections,so this is a powerful (and therefore dangerous) option.For instance, if you select all units then put them all to sleep,nobody will do anything at all.[Design...]The Design item is for access to game designer tools.You cannot use these during a normal game;you will be asked to confirm that you want to design, and if so,@i{Xconq} will change all the windows appropriately and bring up aspecial designer's palette.This is a one-way activity; once somebody in the game becomes a designer,all players will be notified and computer-run players will no longerbother to play.  (In case it's not obvious, this is because it's too easyto cheat using the designer's powers.)@subsection Find MenuThis menu is for various kinds of searching.[Previous Actor][Next Actor][Location][Unit by Name][Selected]Scrolls the most recently-used map over to show the selected unit in a list.@subsection Play MenuThis menu is the main set of commands that you can give to individual units.When you specify one of these, the units affected will be whatever isselected in the window.  If the window is of a type that does not haveselected units (such as a help window), then the items on this menu willbe disabled.[Closeup]Opens closeups (see below) of all the selected units.[Move][Patrol][Return]Directs the selected units to return to the closest place where they canreplenish supplies that have been used up and/or get repairs to any damage.[Wake]Wakes up the selected units.[Sleep]Puts the selected units to sleep.[Reserve]Puts the selected units into reserve.[Build]Brings up the construction window and selects the first of the selectedunits that can do construction.@subsection Side MenuThis menu is for overall control of the side you're playing. @subsection Windows MenuThis menu is for the creation and arrangement of windows.@subsection View MenuThe View menu gives you control over the appearance of the window you'recurrently looking at.  Each kind of window that has any view controlswill have a different view menu.  Currently only map and list windowshave view menus.  Each window has its own view settings, although youcan set defaults for new windows from the preferences.You can find the descriptions of each view menu's items under thedescription of its window, below.@section Windows@i{Xconq} lets you have many windows open at once.Each type has its own specialized functionality.@subsection Map Windows[picture of map window]A map window gives you an overhead view of some part of the @i{Xconq} world.As you might expect, you can scroll around to look at different parts.You can also zoom in and out using the small zoom icons in the lowerleft corner; zooming in (``closer mountains'' icon) makes the cells larger,while zooming out (``farther mountains'' icon)  makes the cells smaller,so you can see more of the world.  You can zoom way in or out!The optional ``top line'' of the map window supplies you with informationabout what the cursor is currently over, plus the current game date.The map control panel is along the left side.  At its top is theauto-select/move-on-click button.  Below that is a set offind-next/previous buttons.  The next set of buttons is controlsfor how the map will be displayed.  These behave identically tothe map's View menu items.Map View MenuSince maps are the main interface to @i{Xconq} games,you have many options for controlling their appearance.@subsection Game WindowThe game window shows you the turn number or date of the current turn,as well as any realtime clocks that may be counting down, and a listof all the sides.  For each side, you see its name, the emblem forthat side, a progress indicator, and icons indicating the side's attitudeand whether it is being played by the computer.You may also numbers indicating scores and/or real time remaining.The progress bar shows how much movement a side has done during the turn.This usually goes down during the turn,but because it indicates a percentage rather than an absolute numberof actions, the percentage may go up sometimes.For instance, if some of your units that have already acted are captured,then the percentage goes up because the *total* numberof actions has gone down!  A gray bar indicates that the side hasfinished all movement for this turn.  There may also be a dashed verticalline in the bar, which indicates the percentage of units that are asleepor in reserve.  Note that a player can always wake up sleeping or reserveunits at any time before the end of the turn.@subsection List WindowsA unit list window just lists all the units, one line each.This is useful for getting a more organized look at your assets.A unit listing shows the icon for the unit, its name and type,action points, hit points, supply, etc.You can create more than one list window.List View MenuList view controls typically either affect what will be listed,or the sorting of the list.  There is also an item to controlthe size of the unit icons.@subsection Unit Closeup WindowsFor any unit, you can create a closeup window.This window supplies full details on the unit.@subsection Construction WindowYou use the construction window to control the construction of new units.The window comes in two parts; the left side is a list of all the unitsthat can do construction, while the right side is a list of all the typesthat can be constructed.@subsection Instructions WindowThe instructions window is the basic info about what game you're playingand what you're supposed to do.Many game designs have few or no instructions.There is a Help button that just brings up the help window.@subsection Help Window@i{Xconq}'s help information is organized into a list of topics.When you first open the help window, you will see the list,and a row of buttons.  To look at a specific topic, just click on it.The ``Topics'' button goes straight to the list of topics,while the ``help'' button shows you the topic describing the help system itself.``Prev'' and ``Next'' buttons take you through the topics in order,while ``Back'' goes to the last topic you looked at.@section Keyboard Commands[list them all - get from help info automatically]@node Designing@chapter Designing with Mac XconqDesigner's tools and capabilities are available via the Design itemin the Edit menu.  The display changes to show you everything in the world,you get a number of special privileges (such as the ability to look atand move ANY unit), and you get a designer's tools palette.@section Using the PaletteIn general, palette items use option-click and option-shift-click tocycle through possible values, and many also have a popup menu.Also note that the selection can be changed without changing the tool;you have to click in the tool and get a heavy border around it beforethe tool is actually changed.Each type of designer tool has a distinct cursor when over a map window,so look for that as well.@subsection Painting TerrainIf you select the terrain item in the palette, then clicking/draggingin a map paints the current terrain type displayed  in the palette(Option-clicking the terrain item cycles through all the types,shift-option-click does the same thing in reverse order).The background terrain type can be cycled via command-click andcommand-shift-click.  @subsection Creating UnitsThe side item creates a popup with the sides - use it to set theside with which a new unit will be created.  Not all units are allowedon all sides - @i{Xconq} marks the sides that are allowed with the currentunit type, and the unit types that are allowed with the current side.@subsection Painting PeopleIf you select the side item in the palette, you can click/drag in amap to set the side of the people in the cells clicked or dragged over.@subsection Painting MaterialYou can create materials in the terrain by selecting the materialsitem in the palette, then painting in any map.@subsection Creating Named FeaturesThe features item in the palette includes several buttonsand a popup menu that displays all the features currently defined.You can click on the buttons to create, destroy, and rename a feature.You can add or remove cells of a feature by painting in any map.@subsection Painting ElevationsYou can set the elevations of terrain by selecting the elevations itemin the palette, then painting in any map.@subsection Painting TemperaturesYou can set the temperatures by selecting the temperatures item in the palette,then painting in any map.@subsection Painting WindsYou can set the direction and force of winds by painting them.The values of direction and force are controlled by option-[shift-]clickand command-[shift-]click, respectively.@subsection Painting CloudsIf you select the clouds item of the palette, you can set the density ofcloud cover by painting.@section Beyond the Designer PaletteThe designer palette and privileges just scratch the surface of what youcan do with @i{Xconq}.  You can define your own complete games with @i{Xconq}using its Game Design Language (GDL), a declarative Lisp-like languagewith many more capabilities than could be provided interactively(in much the same way that HyperTalkª scripting adds to basic HyperCardª)/The @i{Xconq} manual chapter ``Designing Games with @i{Xconq}'' goes into much moredetail about @i{Xconq}'s programmability, and the chapter ``Reference Manual''is the complete description of GDL's abilities.For the Mac specifically, there are some additional customizations thatyou can do.If the Resources file has a PICT whose name is ``<game-name> game'',then if a player selects <game-name> in the new game dialog, this PICTwill be displayed in the dialog.  This is useful to give prospectiveplayers more of an idea of what the game might be like,plus it's a chance to show off your artistry!(If you're a lousy artist, just make a screen shot of the map and use that.)The area for the picture is about 200 pixels across and 100 high;pictures smaller than that will be centered, while largerpictures will be clipped to fit.@section ImagesIf you want to change the icons and pictures in an existing game,or if you want to define new ones, you can do this either with aresource editor such as ResEdit, or with a resource compiler such as Rez,or by editing the portable ``imf'' files.  @i{Xconq} can use PICTs, icons,and patterns to draw with; collectively these will be called ``images''.A group of images that all represent different views of the same thingis an ``image family''.  The concept is similar to the icon families usedby Macintosh programs, but is much more general, since you can have anynumber of images of different sizes and depths, as well as images embeddedin each other.The resource file :lib-mac:Images is the main repository of Mac imagery.You can resource-edit this file, close it, start up @i{Xconq}, and see the results.  For instance, if you want to improve the appearance of the ``city20'' image, you will find a 32x32 'cicn' with that name as well as a 16x16 'sicn'.  You can modify these as you like.  Note that the 'sicn' includes a mask sicn, as does the 'cicn'.  Masks are optional, but improve the appearance of the images.  If you have a new type in a game and you want an image for it, just create a resource, such as a 'cicn', give it the name of the type or its ``image-name'' property, and you're done.The standard resource types for images are 'cicn', 'ICON', 'PAT ', 'ppat','SICN', and 'PICT'.  If a resource of one of these types has a namematching the ``image-name'' (or the type name if no image name is defined)of a type in a game, then @i{Xconq} will use that resource.There are two additional resource types: 'XCic' and 'XCif'.The 'XCic' resources are named colors that can be referred to via ``color''properties of types and sides.  'XCif' resources are raw image family formsin GDL syntax.  If the contents of an image family can be totally definedby the standard resource types, then there need not be an 'XCif' resource,but if an image has any embedded subimages, or a specific location forsubimages, then this information will be in the XCif resource.You can edit by defining this resource type as 'TEXT',which will give you a text editor for the resource, or by justopening the 'TEXT' editor on the resource.For more details about the syntax of image families in GDL,see the general manual.Warning: don't ever make a 'cicn' with id 256!For some reason, if there is a 'cicn' 256 in either the applicationor in any of the resource files that it has open,the small color icons in both the apple menu (far left)and the application menu (far right) become small unrecognizable blobs.This effect seems to be innocuous behaviorwise, but the appearance is poor,and users choose menu items by looking at those icons, so trashing themis a bad thing to do.@section IMFAppIMFApp is a utility for examining and converting the image familiesused by Xconq.It is intended for use by game designers, as an aid to importing andexporting game-related imagery.The general concept of image families is similar to the Finder iconfamilies, where several depths and sizes of an icon are available foruse in different situations.  Xconq adds extra complexity to theconcept by including tiling patterns, by allowing icons to be embeddedin each other, and by using the same image families on several differentplatforms.The platform-independent format is not very efficient to use and wouldbe hard to edit, so IMFApp includes functions to convert between thecommon format and Mac resources.These functions are available from the File Menu.In addition, IMFApp also allows you to look at the images.You can control the images' size, overlay, and use of color.The primary use for this is to test how an image works in varioussituations.  Also, if you design games, this is a good place tostart when choosing images for your game.Since there are hundreds of images available already,the chances are good that the images you want have already been designed.The File menu has items to open and save imf and resource files.New clears any existing images.Opening multiple files merges their contents.The Edit menu is not used.The View menu includes all image appearance controls.Everything in this menu affects only the *display* of the images,and does not, in any way, affect the image families themselves.Display options include size of images, color/mono, name, mask,background/emblem images, and more.@section SoundsMac @i{Xconq} handles sounds in a very simple way.  The resourcefile @samp{:lib-mac:Sounds} includes a number of named @samp{'snd '}resources.[not actually useful yet - names wired into macmap.c]@node Troubleshooting@chapter Troubleshooting Mac XconqIf @i{Xconq} crashes, that is a serious problem; please report it,and include as much information about your setup, what you were doing, etc.@i{Xconq} will sometimes display ``error'' or ``warning'' alerts.These can be caused either by bugs in @i{Xconq}, or more likely,by mistakes in the design of the game you're playing.For instance, you may be playing a version of a game thathas been modified by one of your friends,but the modification was not done correctly,and you'll get an alert unexpectedly.``Error'' alerts are fatal; you may be able to save the game at that point,but don't count on it.  Common ones include errors because you'reloading a text file that is not an @i{Xconq} game, and running out of memory.Most error alerts occur during game startup, while @i{Xconq} is checkingout the game definition that it's loading.  Error alerts that appear duringa game, and do not involve running out of memory, are more serious, andmay indicate bugs in @i{Xconq}, so you should save the game and reportwhat happened.There are many kinds of ``warning'' alerts.  Warnings are not fatal,but they do indicate that all is not well.If you get a warning alert and don't know what it means,it's safer to quit than to try to struggle on.Most warnings indicate mistakes in the design of the game you're playing,and should be reported to the game designer.The following describes several common types of warnings:* Missing images:  A game design may not have had images defined forall types of units and terrain.@i{Xconq} will warn about this, then make up some (ugly) default images itself.Actual game play will be unaffected.* Sides have undesirable locations: A game can specify how close and howfar away each side should be from all the others, and the kind of terraineach will start on.If the world is too small, or doesn't have the right kinds of terrain,then @i{Xconq} will warn about this.  The game will still play normally,but it may be grossly unfair,and if the sides start out hidden from each other,it may be a while until it becomes obvious how unfair it really is.You may also run into these bugs:* Units sometimes appear or disappear unexpectedly.Type Control-R, which recalculates visibility of everything.* In the construction window, clicking on ``Build'' doesn'talways result in a unit being created immediately.It may be that the builder has used up its acp and can'tstart construction until the next turn, or that it hasn'tcome up for executing actions in the current turn.Clicking a second time will make the construction startimmediately.