=head1 Appletalk socketsCurrently, only stream sockets (including out-of-band data)are supported. Appletalk sockets should work between all networked Macintoshesand between applications on a single Mac, provided the SetSelfSend flag is turned on. However, PPC sockets have a better performance for interapplication communicationon a single Machine.=head2 Differences to generic behaviorTwo classes of addresses are supported for AppleTalk. The main address typespecifies numeric addresses.    struct sockaddr_atlk {      short       family;     /* Always AF_APPLETALK                  */      AddrBlock   addr;       /* The numeric AppleTalk socket address   */    };For C<bind()> and C<connect()>, however, you are also allowed to specify symbolicaddresses. C<bind()> registers an NBP address, and C<connect()> performs an NBPlookup. Registered NBP adresses are automatically released when the socket isclosed. No call ever I<returns> a symbolic address.    struct sockaddr_atlk_sym {      short       family;     /* Always ATALK_SYMADDR     */      EntityName  name;       /* The symbolic NBP address   */    };C<choose()> currently only works for existing sockets. The peer must have registereda symbolic address. To restrict the choice of addresses presented, pass a pointerto the following structure for the C<constraint> argument:    typedef struct {      short       numTypes;   /* Number of allowed types */      NLType      types;      /* List of types */    } sa_constr_atlk;