Changes in 1.17
===============

Macintosh Emacs now uses temporary system memory for large buffers.
This means there is no longer a built-in limit on buffer size.

The operation of Cut and Copy has been changed.  The selection
is no longer placed into the kill-ring, just into the clipboard.

When printing multiple files, the standard job dialog appears for the
first file only.

Macintosh Emacs now includes a simple CodeWarrior AppleEvent suite and
a CodeWarrior menu.  Uncomment the marked line in the .emacs file
provided to use the menu.  The current version of Codewarrior
compilers often return large error result numbers after a successful
compilation.  This is a bug in Codewarrior, and you can ignore it.

A bug that caused Emacs to crash when saving very large files on 68K
machines has been fixed.

A bug that sometimes prevented a dired on a folder or disk dropped
onto Emacs has been fixed.  You may have to remove old version of
Emacs from your disk and rebuild your desktop folder before you can
drop folders and disks on Emacs.

The GNU file utilities are upgraded to version 3.12 from 3.9.  The GNU
grep utility is upgraded to 2.0 from 1.6.

Changes in 1.16
===============

Emacs can intelligently read, edit, and write Unix and MS-DOS
formatted text files, as well as binary files.  See the file "About
text file translation" for more.

Any file can now be dropped onto Emacs in the Finder.  Folders and
disks can also be dropped onto Emacs -- the result is a dired on the
folder or disk.

Emacs now looks for backup files with names ending .~[0-9]+~ as well
as just ~ when looking for a type, creator, and resource fork for a
new version of a file.

A bug affecting window size changes has been fixed.

Some bugs in the Think Project Manager external editor interface
have been fixed.  Make sure to turn off "Always save session" in
the Think Project Manager when using the debugger.

Changes in 1.15
===============

If Emacs is launched on a machine with more than 32 megabytes of
memory, Emacs now will attempt to load itself into low memory.

When Emacs is launched, the previously-used window size is reused only
when that window would fit entirely on the desktop.

Other small bugs have been fixed.

Changes in 1.14b1
=================

It is now possible to redefine the keys on the numeric keypad, the
keys F1-F15, the cursor keys, and the keys labeled help, home, page
up, del, end, and page down.  See the file lisp/term/Macintosh-win.el,
and the sample .emacs file.

Both Emacs and the "Emacs Keyboard" INIT are now fat binaries for
Power Macintoshes.  The utilities are still 68000 based only.

The color editor now works correctly on direct devices.  The frame and
background colors are set immediately when the dialog is dismissed
with OK.

The Emacs window position from the preferences file is used even when
the window was previouly on a second monitor, as long as that monitor
is still operating.

Various timing parameters have been adjusted to make Emacs more
responsive in the foreground, and more friendly in the background.

Character 177 octal, produced with C-q DEL, is now properly displayed
as ^? with ctl-arrow t, \0177 with ctl-arrow nil.

Printing has been rewritten, this time as a second application.  An
item "Page Setup" appears in the File menu.  That setup is used for
all printing.  The "Print File From Disk" item now produces output
with page headers.  Tabs when printed on a LaserWriter now leave the
correct amount of white space.

The Apple event support for Symantec C++ includes support for Think
Reference.  Include the statement
	(load "think-c/think-ref")
in your •emacs file to load support for Think Reference alone.

The sources are available.

Changes in 1.13b2:
==================

The name for .emacs is now •emacs.  The drivers of Emacs now
automatically convert an initial '.' of any pathname component to '•'.
The •emacs file is now kept in the directory ~/, and no longer in
~emacs/.  Does this create any problems?

It is now possible to set a specific color for the text appearing
under the cursor.

Emacs will run without its system extension installed.  In this case,
modifier key remapping is ignored.

C-_ again does undo.  More generally, the key combination
control-shift has been added to those recognized.  The combinations
control-option and control-shift-option, required by some non-American
keyboards, are also recognized.

When printing in landscape mode, lines now extend the full width of
the paper.  The program lpr recognizes the -p option, and prints
headings with it, no headings without it.  This means lpr-buffer and
print-buffer now do different things.

A bug involving menus that crashed many machines at the startup of
Emacs has been fixed.

Changes in 1.13b1:
==================

The startup file .emacs now goes by the name •emacs in order to avoid
the problems other Macintosh programs have with filenames that begin
with a period.  This is not a backward-compatible change--you must
rename .emacs to •emacs to use it now.  The character • is typed
option-8.  If you use option as meta, you must type option-command-8.

The utility “wakeup” is now included, and the function display-time works.

Emacs now runs on machines with the 68000 processor.  Emacs still
requires System 7.

The quit character C-g is now consistently caught properly when Emacs
prompts for (y or n), or for (yes or no).

When the option key functions as a meta key, the behavior of M-e, M-i, M-u,
and other previous dead-key combinations is now correct.

The meanings of the control, option, shift, command, and caps-lock keys are
now configurable from the “Change modifier keys” menu item in the Special menu.
See the file About Emacs for more information.

Printing is faster, and less prone to crashing.

Dragging or growing the editor window now works correctly on systems
with more than one monitor.  Very large or tall windows may require
you to give Emacs more stack space.

The keystrokes C-m and C-j are no longer reversed.

A bug in the shell involving expansion of '*' alone has been fixed.

The use of automatically repeating keystrokes is smoother when many
extensions are present.

The Unix emulation now considers a file to have write-permission only
when that file is not locked.  Folders and volumes always have
write-permission.

A menu “Buffers” has been added.  Work buffers are listed first,
followed by buffers created by dired, followed by all other buffers.

The window size and position is now stored in a preferences file
instead of in the resource fork of Emacs itself.  The choice of font
and font size is now stored in the preferences file.

A bug in the handler for the quit-application event has been fixed.

In dired mode, 'G', which runs chgrp, now changes the type of a file.
'M', which runs chown, now changes the mode bits of a file.  Only the
write permissions are affected.  The file is effectively locked or
unlocked. 'O' still changes the creator of a file.

On four or more bit-per-pixel displays, Emacs now works in color.
There is a dialog box to change the colors Emacs uses, available from
the Special menu.  The color choices are stored in the preferences
file.

A bug that caused an incorrect display of lines that were previously
highlighted has been fixed.

The function suspend-emacs, usually called with C-z, now brings the
Finder to the front.  Emacs is not actually suspended in the sense
it would be in Unix, since all Macintosh processes are always running.

Now C-@ as well as C-space sets mark.

A partial implementation of the Apple event suite for Symantec C++
version 6.0 is included.

Much more Toolbox support has been added.  Use it at your own risk.
See the directory ~emacs/lisp/mac.

Changes in 1.12d:
=================

A bug in the Paste command (command-V) has been fixed.

The dired code of Emacs 19 has replaced that of Emacs 18.  There is
now information about dired available from M-x info.

A bug that prevented complete loading of textures.el from .emacs has
been fixed.

The functions user-full-name, user-login-name, user-real-login-name,
and system-name now take their values from the strings entered into
the “Sharing Setup” control panel.

The function make-symbolic-link is now implemented correctly.  It
creates an alias.

Changes in 1.11d:
=================

A bug in the threads package that broke lpr and printing functions
within Emacs has been fixed.

A bug that caused Emacs to give errors when parsing pathnames prefixed
with ~dirname/.. has been fixed.

A bug that caused Emacs to hang sometimes when brought from the back
to be the front application has been fixed.

A first attempt has been made to enable Emacs to read files that use
'\n' instead of '\r' to end lines.  See "About Emacs".

Emacs now works correctly with non-American keyboards.

Slashes in Macintosh filenames now appear as colons within Emacs.
Using a colon in a filename within Emacs gives you that filename with
slashes within the Finder.

The handling of ~ in directory names has been changed.  The meaning of
directory ~/ is now configurable.  See "About Emacs" for more.

The Toolbox is more accessible, though its direct use is not
recommended.  See ~emacs/lisp/mac/traps.el.

The function of the option key can be changed.  See "About Emacs".

When a file X is edited and saved, file X is renamed X~, and a new
file X is created.  Now, the creator, type, and resource fork of the
original X are preserved in the new X.

The behavior of Emacs when saving files referenced by aliases is
saner.

The menu items New, Save, Save As, and Close now conform more closely
to regular Macintosh behavior.

Emacs is now stationery-aware.

AEInstallEventHandler has been implemented.  See the file
~emacs/lisp/mac/core-suite.el for an example.
