Here's source code for a library of routines for users of MPW C and
THINK C (and possibly other C compilers) that makes it somewhat easier
to port Unix programs, or at least to write Unix programs that are
easily portable to the Macintosh.

More-or-less Unix-compatible routines currently provided by this package:
	abort()
	access()
	chdir()
	ctime()
	getwd()
	mkdir()
	opendir(), readdir(), closedir()
	perror()
	rmdir()
	stat()
	sync()
	time(), localtime()
	
Note: I've last used this with MPW version 2.0; MPW version 3.x may
include most of these in its own library.  THINK C 5.0 includes
several, but these are still needed: chdir(), getwd(), mkdir(),
opendir() and friends, rmdir(), stat(), sync().  The same is true for
THINK C 4.0 (you may have to tweak the source in minor ways to get it
to compile there).

I've also included a routine to get the name of the boot volume, and a
way to set a hook in MPW's open routine, which can be used to set the
type of all files created to `TEXT'.  This was also last tested in MPW
2.0.

Finally, there are two simple example programs (a columnizing `ls' and
`pwd', both to be run as MPW tools) and a Makefile.  Note that the
Makefile contains non-ASCII characters and thus may be mangled by
mailers; it should however be easy enough to reconstruct it if you know
what an MPW Makefile should look like.

All routines work on MFS and HFS (but don't know about MFS folders); no
guarantees for Mac SE and Mac II although I don't expect problems (most
things I do are just file system calls).

I hope that the files are sufficiently commented, and moust routines are
sufficiently well-known, that no additional documentation is necessary.

Being sick and tired of copyright wars I hereby place this code in the
public domain, although it would still be nice if my name remained in
redistributed or changed copies of the source.

Guido van Rossum
CWI, dept. AA
Kruislaan 413
1098 SJ  Amsterdam

E-mail: guido@cwi.nl
